docs: add server concept (#23372)
nuxt/nuxt: docs/1.getting-started/6.server.md

---
navigation.icon: uil:laptop-connection

> description: Build full-stack application, fetch data from your database, create a REST API or even generate static server-side content like a sitemap or a RSS feed, from a single codebase.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: Build full-stack applications, fetch data from your database, create APIs, or even generate static server-side content like a sitemap or a RSS feed, from a single codebase.
```

---

# Server

> The ability to create within your app server endpoints is one of the new core feature of Nuxt 3. It allows you to **build full-stack application**, fetch data from your database, create a REST API or even generate static server-side content like a sitemap or a RSS feed, from a single codebase.

Author: ```suggestion
The ability to create, within your app, server endpoints is one of the new core feature of Nuxt 3. It allows you to **build full-stack application**, fetch data from a database or another server, create a REST API or even generate static server-side content like a sitemap or a RSS feed, from a single codebase.
```

> The ability to create, within your app, server endpoints is one of the new core feature of Nuxt 3. It allows you to **build full-stack application**, fetch data from a database or another server, create a REST API or even generate static server-side content like a sitemap or a RSS feed, from a single codebase.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Nuxt's server framework allows you to build **full-stack applications**. For example, you can fetch data from a database or another server, create a REST API or even generate static server-side content like a sitemap or a RSS feed - all from a single codebase.
```

> The ability to create, within your app, server endpoints is one of the new core feature of Nuxt 3. It allows you to **build full-stack application**, fetch data from a database or another server, create a REST API or even generate static server-side content like a sitemap or a RSS feed, from a single codebase.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ability to create, within your app, server endpoints is one of the new core feature of Nuxt 3. It allows you to **build full-stack applications**, fetch data from a database or another server, create an API or even generate static server-side content like a sitemap or a RSS feed, from a single codebase.
```

::alert{type="info"}

> For more informations about usage of the `~/server` directory, please visit the [directory structure related page](/docs/guide/directory-structure/server).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more informations about usage of the `~/server` directory, please visit the [server directory structure section](/docs/guide/directory-structure/server).
```

::

## Powered by Nitro

> Nuxt 3 uses [`Nitro`](https://github.com/unjs/nitro), a project from [`UnJS`](https://unjs.io), for all of his server-side stuff, along to [`Vite`](https://vitejs.dev) or [`webpack`](https://webpack.js.org) for the client-side.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Nuxt 3 server-side features are powered by [`Nitro`](https://github.com/unjs/nitro), a [`UnJS`](https://unjs.io) project, while the client side features are powered by [`Vite`](https://vitejs.dev) or [`webpack`](https://webpack.js.org).
```

> Nuxt 3 server-side features are powered by [`Nitro`](https://github.com/unjs/nitro), a [`UnJS`](https://unjs.io) project, while the client side features are powered by [`Vite`](https://vitejs.dev) or [`webpack`](https://webpack.js.org).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Nuxt 3 server-side features are powered by [Nitro](https://github.com/unjs/nitro), a [UnJS](https://unjs.io) project, while the client side features are powered by [Vite](https://vitejs.dev) or [webpack](https://webpack.js.org).
```

::alert{type="info"}

> Note that [`Nitro`](https://github.com/unjs/nitro) is framework agnostic and can be used without Nuxt.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Note that Nitro is framework agnostic and can be used without Nuxt.
```

> Note that [`Nitro`](https://github.com/unjs/nitro) is fully framework agnostic and can be used in any project, even in standalone to create a server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that [`Nitro`](https://github.com/unjs/nitro) is framework agnostic and can be used without Nuxt.
```

::

> Using [`Nitro`](https://github.com/unjs/nitro) give to Nuxt superpowers:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using [`Nitro`](https://github.com/unjs/nitro) give Nuxt superpowers:
```

> - Full control on the server-side part of your app

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Full control of the server-side part of your app
```

- Deploy your app anywhere

> - Hybrid mode for rendering your app

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Hybrid rendering for your app
```

> ## Full control on the server-side part of your app

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Full control of the server-side part of your app
```

> With [`Nitro`](https://github.com/unjs/nitro), you can easily manage the server-side of your Nuxt 3 app; from endpoints to middlewares.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
With Nitro, you can easily manage the server-side of your Nuxt 3 app; from endpoints to middlewares.
```

Both endpoints and middleware can be defined like this:

> ```ts [~/server/{routes,middleware}/index.ts]

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```ts [server/{routes,middleware}/index.ts]
```

> With [`Nitro`](https://github.com/unjs/nitro), you can easily manager the server-side of your Nuxt 3 app from endpoints to middlewares.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With [`Nitro`](https://github.com/unjs/nitro), you can easily manage the server-side of your Nuxt 3 app; from endpoints to middlewares.
```

> Both endpoints and middlewares a simple as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Both endpoints and middlewares can be defined like this:
```

export default defineEventHandler({
  // ... Do whatever you want here
})
```

> And you can simply return `text`, `json`, `html` or even a `stream`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And you can directly return `text`, `json`, `html` or even a `stream`.
```

> Out-of-the-box, [`Nitro`](https://github.com/unjs/nitro) supports **hot module reloading** and **auto-import** like the other parts of your Nuxt 3 app.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Out-of-the-box, Nitro supports **hot module replacement** and **auto-import** like the other parts of your Nuxt application.
```

::alert{type="info"}

> Learn more about endpoints and middlewares in [the related section](/docs/guide/directory-structure/server).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Learn more about endpoints and middlewares in [the server directory structure section](/docs/guide/directory-structure/server).
```

::

## Deploy your app anywhere

[`Nitro`](https://github.com/unjs/nitro) offer the ability to deploy your Nuxt 3 anywhere, from a bare metal server to the edge network, with a start time near to 1ms. That's fast!

> Today, [`Nitro`](https://github.com/unjs/nitro) offers more than 15 presets to build your Nuxt 3 app, for cloud provider, including:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Today, [`Nitro`](https://github.com/unjs/nitro) offers more than 15 presets to build your Nuxt 3 app for different cloud providers and servers, including:
```

- [Cloudflare Workers](https://workers.cloudflare.com/)
- [Netlify Functions](https://www.netlify.com/products/functions/)
- [Vercel Edge Network](https://vercel.com/docs/edge-network/introduction)
- [AWS Lambda](https://aws.amazon.com/lambda/)
- [IIS](https://www.iis.net/)

Or for other runtime:

- [Deno](https://deno.land/)
- [Bun](https://bun.sh/)

::alert{type="info"}
Learn more about deployment in [the related section](https://nuxt.com/docs/getting-started/deployment).
::

> ## Hybrid mode for rendering your app

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Hybrid rendering for your app
```

> Need for both static and dynamic pages in your Nuxt 3 app? [`Nitro`](https://github.com/unjs/nitro) covers your back!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Need for both static and dynamic pages in your Nuxt 3 app? Nitro covers your back!
```

> Need for both static and dynamic pages in your Nuxt 3 app? [`Nitro`](https://github.com) covers your back!

Author: ```suggestion
Need for both static and dynamic pages in your Nuxt 3 app? [`Nitro`](https://github.com/unjs/nitro) covers your back!
```

> Nitro has a powerful feature called `routeRules` which allow you to define a set of rules to customize the rendering mode of all your routes, client and server from your Nuxt 3 app.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Nitro has a powerful feature called `routeRules` which allow you to define a set of rules to customize the routes rendering mode of your Nuxt 3 app.
```

> ```ts [~/nuxt.config.ts]

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```ts [nuxt.config.ts]
```

export default defineNuxtConfig({
  routeRules: {
    '/': { prerender: true }, // Generated at build time for SEO purpose
    '/api/*': { cache: { maxAge: 60 * 60 } } // Cached for 1 hour
    '/old-page': { redirect: { to: { '/new-page', status: 302 } } // Redirection to avoid 404
    // ...
  }
})
```

> 

Reviewer: Maybe we can document the `defineRouteRules` composable there too.

Author: Oh! I wasn't aware of this composable! 😄

Author: There is no composable with that name in the docs. Will check code source and add documentation about it!

Reviewer 3: It is still experimental, we should update the docs when not experimental anymore

[More rules are available](https://nuxt.com/docs/guide/concepts/rendering#hybrid-rendering) to customize the rendering mode of your routes.

> [`Nitro`](https://github.com/unjs/nitro) is used to build the app for server side rendering, as well as pre-rendering.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Nitro is used to build the app for server side rendering, as well as pre-rendering.
```

> [`Nitro`](https://github.com/unjs/nitro) is also used to generate your Nuxt 3 app when using the [`generate` command](https://nuxt.com/docs/api/commands/generate) and the server when building the app for runtime server side rendering.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[`Nitro`](https://github.com/unjs/nitro) is used to build the app for server side rendering, as well as pre-rendering.
```
